LORD JIM INTRO




New readers are advised that this Introduction makes details of the plot explicit.

Never out of print since its publication in 1900, Lord Jim in some sense requires little introduction. It is one of the high points in the development of the English novel, marking the transition from the Victorian novel of social concern to Modernist experiments with form that culminated in the writings of James Joyce and Virginia Woolf. Lord Jim confirmed Conrad's authorial genius and ushered in his greatest creative phase. The novels that followed included the great trio of political novels: Nostromo (1904), The Secret Agent (1907) and Under Western Eyes (1911).

Published at the height of Empire, when the British Merchant Service dominated the world's shipping-trade, Lord Jim is a very British novel. It tells the story of a young English officer in the Merchant Service who disgraces himself before becoming the benevolent ‘virtual ruler’ of a remote Malay state. The English narrator, Marlow, is one of Conrad's most celebrated and enduring creations. To Virginia Woolf, ‘Conrad was compound of two men; together with the sea captain dwelt that subtle, refined, and fastidious analyst whom he called Marlow.’1 Through Marlow, Conrad brings an English perspective to bear upon social codes of comportment and inclusion, together with the public and private responsibilities these entail. Coming after ‘Youth’ (1898) and Heart of Darkness (1899), Lord Jim completes a trilogy of Marlow narratives.

The novel is shaped by its concern with the life-giving properties of danger, the dark voids that gape under the most polished of surfaces and the problem, once these have been perceived, of going on living. In his ‘Author's Note’, Conrad identified his subject as ‘the acute consciousness of lost honour’. Marlow views it as one of ‘those struggles of an individual trying to save from the fire his idea of what his moral identity should be’ (VII). Published in the same year as Freud's The Interpretation of Dreams, the novel shares Freud's concern with identity, questioning whether the self is ultimately public or private property.





I


Britain's pride in herself as a nation ruling the waves derives from a history of maritime successes punctuated by disasters, such as the sinking of the Birkenhead in 1852 or of the Titanic in 1912, where tragedy is ennobled by self-sacrificing service. The call ‘Women and children first’ has become a byword for what Captain Brierly terms the ‘professional decency’ (VI) that unites and identifies the seafaring community. Accounts of the Birkenhead's sinking in shark-infested waters off the South African coast reveal how soldiers stood fast in their ranks on deck to enable the women and children on board to leave safely, passing into mythology in a host of well-known poems and paintings. Similar reports of chivalry make up part of the Titanic myth and include, for example, a woman's account of how her husband, having assisted her into a lifeboat, replied to pleas to join her with the stolid phrase: ‘I must be a gentleman.’2 In that light, Punch quite rightly carried a cartoon of a mourning Britannia accompanied by a paean to ‘that gallant breed/ Schooled in the ancient chivalry of the sea’ (24 April 1912).

When, in Lord Jim, the Patna's European crew abandons her to her fate, they infringe the unwritten code of the sea that the captain should be the last to leave a sinking ship. Not explicitly stated in Merchant Shipping Acts, this is tacitly assumed when he signs the ship's articles, accepting full responsibility for the vessel, her cargo, crew and passengers. Inevitably, these articles have a pragmatic, mercantile purpose. They provide a safeguard against a ship's being scuttled by a crew member hoping to benefit from her cargo. Formulated as heroic duty and inspired by the chivalric notion of ‘death before dishonour’, the ethics of service are enshrined by maritime tradition in the burden of command. The Patna incident in Lord Jim thus has inevitable prolongations, personal and national, that engage with unwritten but communally understood values identifying ‘gentlemanly’ behaviour.

Before turning his hand to fiction, Conrad was a sailor and officer in the British Merchant Service from 1878 to 1894, passing the examinations up to the rank of Master Mariner, or, in layman's terms, ship's captain. He wryly described himself as ‘a Polish nobleman, cased in British tar’ (Collected Letters, vol. I, p. 52). Some seventy years after Nelson's victory at Trafalgar had ensured that Britannia ruled the waves, and at a time when the sea had become ‘a national obsession’,3 Conrad saw the world from the decks of British trading ships, the workhorses of Empire. His was the last great age of sail. By the time Lord Jim appeared, steamships – swifter, larger and more technologically advanced – had taken over, reflecting Britain's industrial revolution in the nineteenth century, the Age of Steel. Lord Jim is framed by works that bear witness to this transition: the romance of sail, celebrated in The Nigger of the ‘Narcissus’ (1897), gives way to the commercial functionality of steam in ‘Typhoon’ (1902).

The area of the world with which Conrad's writings are most commonly associated is the Malay Archipelago, and an early reviewer even pronounced that he might become its Kipling (Spectator, 19 October 1895, p. 530). The history of Europe's involvement in the Eastern seas is, by and large, an economic one: since the sixteenth century at least, the highly lucrative spice trade proved irresistible. The novel's geographical setting thus allows history to be visualized. As Marlow exclaims of his maritime predecessors, the early Dutch and English adventurers: ‘Where wouldn't they go for pepper!’ (XXII). When he goes to Patusan, Jim, an Englishman, replaces Cornelius, a ‘Malacca Portuguese’, as the agent of Stein, a German.

But if the commonwealth of nations represented in Lord Jim reflects historical realities, it ensures, too, that all the world contributes to the making of Jim: in these international waters, a French gunboat tows a Chinese-owned Arab-chartered steamship, the Patna, deserted by her ‘New South Wales German’ skipper, to Aden, a British colonial port. Even the German captain's Bismarckian ‘blood-and-iron’ air (I) is consistent with the age's clichés about itself. His flight from the ‘damned Englishmen’ (V) and their Court of Inquiry, however, refocuses the trial as a national affair, albeit conducted beneath the gaze of the international marine community. Jim is, in effect, tried on British soil, by a British court of law.

In the wake of Almayer's Folly (1895) and An Outcast of the Islands (1896), also set in the Eastern seas, Lord Jim traces an important development in Conrad's engagement with the area. In the two earlier novels, Captain Lingard's trading-station in Sambir, north-west Borneo, flies the Union Jack, but Sambir is in a Dutch colony, and the novels’ protagonists, Almayer and Willems, are of Dutch descent. In Lord Jim, Conrad realigns his national focus, casting both his protagonist and his narrator as English.

To Marlow, Jim ‘stood there for all the parentage of his kind’ (V). This ‘parentage’ extends beyond the traditions of the maritime community to Jim's father, a country parson, and Jim's speech is larded with public-school-isms – ‘Jove!’, ‘You are a brick’ (XVII) – often enough resonant with notions of responsibility and gentlemanliness: ‘Upon my word’ (XXVI) and ‘Honour bright!’ (XXVII). Marlow, too, ensures the novel a specifically English inflection when he eulogizes ‘home’, in a claim reminiscent of one made by Stein: ‘Each blade of grass has its spot on earth whence it draws its life, its strength; and so is man rooted to the land from which he draws his faith together with his life’ (XXI). The insistent claim that Jim is ‘one of us’ has professional and national consequences, not least for the expectation that an officer will behave like a gentleman, and it is Captain Brierly, after all, who advocates showing ‘a stiff upper lip’ (VI). As their titles suggest, the climactic conflict between ‘Lord’ Jim and ‘Gentleman’ Brown allegorizes a chivalric contest of honour.





II


Meticulous research has shown that Conrad drew upon local English prototypes for his portrait of Jim. His name is thought to derive from that of Jim Lingard, Olmeijer's trading partner in Berau and nephew of William Lingard, a trader-adventurer whose exploits, which included establishing a permanent tradingstation at Berau, earned him the title Rajah Laut (King of the Sea). A further source is provided by the life of Sir James Brooke, first Rajah of Sarawak, upon which Jim's benevolent rule in Patusan draws. Twenty years after the publication of Lord Jim, Conrad wrote to Sarawak's Dowager Ranee: ‘The first Rajah Brooke has been one of my boyish admirations, a feeling I have kept to this day strengthened by the better understanding of the greatness of his character and the unstained rectitude of his purpose’ (Collected Letters, vol. VII, P. 137).

The multiplicity of perspectives on which the narrative insists includes that of the non-European world. Jim's ‘crime’ infringes a professional code of honour, but it is committed against 800 pilgrims to Mecca. Drawn from all quarters of the East, ‘dese cattle’, as the Patna's German captain calls them, they all but evade Marlow's account of the trial. Also deserted on the Patna are her non-European crew, who remain at their posts unquestioningly. Having arrived ‘amongst the native batch of all sorts brought over from Aden to give evidence at the inquiry’, the Malay helmsman, that ‘extraordinary and damning witness’, provides ‘the sensation of the second day's proceedings’ (VIII), yet his appearance is summarized in a page, and he unleashes a jumble of words mainly meaningless to its hearers. With poetic justice, Jim's ‘opportunity’ at self-redemption takes him to Patusan, where the internecine rivalries of Sherif Ali, Rajah Allang and Doramin – all eager to control the area and its economy – provide a counterpart to foreign attempts to establish hegemony in the region as personified in Stein, Cornelius and Jim. One of the ironies here is that the very title sherif recollects the region's Arab colonization, another infiltration by outsiders who brought with them their desire for expansion, their class and political structures and their religion. Significantly, Jim supports Doramin and his Bugis, themselves outsiders from the Celebes (now Sulawesi). In an age when Reuters extended its tentacles from Europe to the Far East, Patusan remains ‘beyond the end of telegraph cables’ (XXIX); exiled there, Jim is alienated from the ‘white world’, at least until the arrival of Gentleman Brown and his desperados.

While much fiction bears an autobiographical imprint, Conrad's tales appear to be more than usually haunted by their origins. In an essay on Henry James written in 1904, he claimed: ‘Fiction is history, human history, or it is nothing’,4 and in a letter to H. G. Wells of 1907, he offered a tripartite definition of ‘the perfect Novelist’: ‘Chronicler[,] Biographer and Historian’ (Collected Letters, vol. III, p. 461). A single year will serve to indicate how porous are the boundaries between Conrad's own experiences and the events he wrote about.

On 18 February 1887, Conrad shipped in the Highland Forest for a voyage from Amsterdam to Semarang in Central Java. As first mate, Conrad's responsibilities included stowing the cargo. Unfortunately, his unfamiliarity with the vessel and his system of loading caused the ship to roll dangerously, which resulted in his being struck by a falling spar. The precise nature of his temporary disability remains unspecified: ‘“queer symptoms,” as the captain, who treated them, used to say… wishing that it had been a straightforward broken leg’.5 Signing off in mid-June, Conrad spent ten days in Semarang before shipping to Singapore as a passenger in the S.S. Celestial. He was admitted to the General Hospital and then recovered further at the Sailors’ Home for Officers, before finding work in August on a country ship, the Vidar, in which he made four trips as first mate between Singapore and Dutch trading-ports on Borneo and the Celebes.

At the trading-post of Berau in north-eastern Borneo Conrad met the Java-born Eurasian trader Willem Karel Olmeijer, of whom he later confessed: ‘if I had not got to know Almayer pretty well it is almost certain there would never have been a line of mine in print’.6 ‘Almayer’ is a central character in Conrad's first two novels, Almayer's Folly (1895) and An Outcast of the Islands (1896), in which Berau provides the prototype for the fictional Sambir. Correspondences between Conrad's life and art are everywhere. For example, Captain John McWhir of the Highland Forest lends his surname, slightly amended, to the Nan-Shan's captain in ‘Typhoon’. More intricately, it is while serving as chief mate under a Scottish captain that Jim is disabled by a falling spar in Lord Jim and as ‘His lameness… persisted… when the ship arrived at an Eastern port he had to go to the hospital. His recovery was slow, and he was left behind’ (II). From here, like Conrad, Jim signs on in a country ship, the Patna. Furthermore, in Lord Jim, Stein, whose house lies on Semarang's outskirts, has business interests in its port.

The Patna tale in Lord Jim has its origin in a maritime scandal of 1880, when the steamship Jeddah, carrying nearly 1,000 pilgrims to the Hajj from Penang to Jeddah, encountered bad weather, sprang a leak and was abandoned by her European captain and crew off Cape Guardafui on Somaliland's northeast tip, on 8 August. Rescued by a passing steamship, the crew were taken to Aden, where they reported their ship lost. Jim's counterpart in the Jeddah, her first mate Augustine Podmore Williams, did not jump but was, instead, thrown overboard by the pilgrims, giving an added inflection to Jim's cagey confession ‘I had jumped… It seems’ (IX). Like the Patna, however, the Jeddah did not sink. She was towed into Aden by the S.S. Antenor a day after being reported lost. A maritime scandal ensued, resulting in inquiries in Aden and Singapore in which the captain and first mate figured prominently. The incident had international consequences: an action for salvage in Singapore, a debate in the Singapore Legislative Assembly and a question in the House of Commons. The captain's certificate was suspended for three years; the chief officer was reprimanded.

At the time of the Jeddah incident, Conrad was between ships, lodging at 6 Dynevor Road in London's Stoke Newington district and boning up for his second mate's examination, which he passed on 28 May 1880. He left Sydney in the Loch Etive in late August. He could not have been unaware of the Jeddah incident, widely reported and much criticized in the press. The Daily Chronicle's account includes the comment: ‘It is to be feared that pilgrim ships are officered by unprincipled and cowardly men who disgrace the traditions of seamanship. We sincerely trust that no Englishman was amongst the boatload of cowards who left the Jeddah and her thousand passengers to shift for themselves.’7 Norman Sherry speculates that Conrad probably saw the Jeddah while in Singapore in early 1883, when, coincidentally, he was involved in an inquiry into the loss of the Palestine, an incident that provided the basis for ‘Youth’. In Lord Jim, the Patna's fate is more mysterious than her model's: having struck an unidentified, submerged obstacle, she is holed and begins shipping water. The crew abandon ship, are rescued by the passing Avondale and report the Patna lost with all passengers. Hubris can hardly wait to get at them. A passing French gunboat, bound home, responds to the Patna's plight and tows her to Aden. In the ensuing professional and social ignominy, Jim, deserted by the crew, stands trial alone. The Court of Inquiry cancels the certificates of the German skipper and Jim, his first mate, finding the pair ‘in utter disregard of their plain duty’ and charging them with ‘abandoning in the moment of danger the lives and property confided to their charge’ (XIV). Jim is henceforth ‘a seaman in exile from the sea’ (I). The description is especially apt, for the sea provides the basis for his self-ideal in the heroic possibilities of service: ‘He saw himself saving people from sinking ships, cutting away masts in a hurricane, swimming through a surf with a line’ and ‘always an example of devotion to duty, and as unflinching as a hero in a book’ (I). Exiled from the sea, he is dislocated from his conception of himself.

In Lord Jim, the ‘plain duty’ of seamanship is expanded into a conflict between social codes and individual ideals. While the court's verdict recognizes Jim's public guilt, and deprives him of his professional livelihood, the private disgrace is what matters to him. The presence of Marlow as sympathetic narrator provides an appropriately equivocal focus of perception. Speaking with the authority of long years in the Merchant Service, yet prepared to look beyond the ‘facts’ of Jim's case that form the court's primary concern, Marlow wants to see Jim ‘squirm for the honour of the craft’, while recognizing that he ‘stood there for all the parentage of his kind’ (V).





III


Lord Jim is, famously, two novels in one: the psychological drama of the Patna episode gives way to the exotic romance of its Patusan sequence. Reflecting the divided obligations of the hero, to society and to himself, the genres of literary Modernism and Romance are forced into a correspondence that questions their individual logic and coherence. In his ‘Author's Note’, Conrad confessed that his original intention was to write a short story based on the pilgrim-ship episode; he only belatedly recognized its potential as a ‘good starting-point for a free and wandering tale’, and the novel grew far beyond his or his publisher's expectations. Serialized in fourteen issues of the conservative and widely read monthly Blackwood's Magazine (October 1899–November 1900), the final version runs to more than 130,000 words. While Conrad conceded that the novel's division into its Patna and Patusan halves was its ‘plague spot’, Blackwood's literary advisor, David Meldrum, defended the work's expansion, arguing that it transformed Lord Jim into ‘a more important story’, even ‘a great story’ (Collected Letters, vol. II, p. 302).8

The novel's epigraph, a translated aphorism from the German Romantic poet Friedrich Leopold, Baron von Hardenberg (1772–1801), who wrote under the pen-name Novalis, has obvious relevance for the relationship between Jim and Marlow, and, more generally, for the theme of community in which the reader, too, is implicated: ‘It is certain my conviction gains infinitely, the moment another soul will believe in it.’ The claim might also be seen to voice the concerns of an emergent author, writing in his third language (after Polish and French) for an English readership. To Marlow, the character-narrator whose perspective is simultaneously challenging and perceptive, Jim remains ‘one of us’ – but he also recognizes that ‘of all mankind Jim had no dealings but with himself’ (XXXVI). As Marlow is often viewed as Conrad's alter ego, so Jim becomes his, for Marlow, too, is looking for a faith, not for the self-ideal of his romantic ‘very young brother’ (XXI) but for ‘the sovereign power enthroned in a fixed standard of conduct’ (V), thrown into doubt by Jim's transgression. Jim's attempts to redeem himself in his own eyes are thus entangled with Marlow's need ‘to keep up the illusion of my beginnings’ (XI) and reaffirm the social claims of solidarity. They are also intimately related to the late-Victorian search for moral certitudes in a universe recently deprived of transcendent meaning. If God, as Nietzsche declared, was dead, substitutes were quickly sought out.

Dramatized as an after-dinner tale that Marlow has told ‘many times, in distant parts of the world’ (IV), Jim's story emerges through the various meetings between the two men and, since Marlow is ‘always eager to take opinion on it… individual opinion—international opinion’ (XIV), it includes chance encounters with a host of characters associated with or interested in Jim's case. This penchant for opening up dual perspectives, matched by an enthusiasm for filling the work with doubles and alter egos, results in a shifting portrait of Jim, one that emerges from a process of disputation and critique. Jim's ‘exquisite sensibility’ (I) is thus subject to contrasting interpretations: for the imaginative pragmatist Chester, the fact that Jim takes the court's verdict ‘to heart’ means he is ‘no good’ (XIV); diametrically opposed to this, Stein, who defines Jim as ‘romantic’ (XX), advocates sending him to ‘a totally new set of conditions for his imaginative faculty to work upon’ (XXI). Mediating between these extreme views of Jim is Marlow, for whom ‘those who do not feel do not count’. His verdict is that ‘in virtue of his feeling he mattered’ (XXI).

No less than Marlow, the reader is thus made to take ‘a definite part in a dispute impossible of decision’ (VIII). For instance, Captain Brierly commits suicide shortly after presiding as one of the judges at the Court of Inquiry where, according to Marlow, ‘he was probably holding silent inquiry into his own case. The verdict must have been of unmitigated guilt’ (IV; emphases added). Jim gains by the comparison of the two ‘cases’: not even ‘Big Brierly’ could be certain that he would have remained at his post had he been in the Patna. But Marlow never actually states – or proves – this. Instead, the juxtaposition of the two incidents is designed to steer the reader towards this conclusion. Composed over time and through a series of chance collocations and comprised of a host of perspectives of varying authority, a delicately shaded, highly impressionistic portrait of Jim emerges. The reader shares Marlow's dilemma: ‘The views he let me have of himself were like those glimpses through the shifting rents in a thick fog’ (VI). One is reminded of Claude Monet's response to the critical reaction that greeted Impression, soleil levant (1872): ‘Poor blind idiots! They want to see everything clearly, even through the fog.’9 Marlow's repeated description of Jim as ‘under a cloud’ has both psychological and perspectival force.





IV


The structure of Lord Jim proves deceptive, particularly on first reading. The novel begins in the third person (almost certainly a hangover from its origin as a short story), continues in the first person with Marlow and, despite charting Jim's progress from the world of the Patna inquiry to Patusan, ends with Marlow still unsure as to whether Jim has exonerated himself in his own eyes. The first four chapters are presented by an omniscient narrator who recounts Jim's history up to his exile in Patusan but withholds the ‘fact’ of his deserting the Patna. That this narrator offers an incomplete summary of Jim's life – not, for instance, extending to Gentleman Brown's arrival in Patusan – implicitly questions the nature of authority: what does it mean – indeed, is it possible – to claim to know another person? At this point, Marlow takes up the story as an involved narrator, assuming the role of ‘an ally, a helper, an accomplice’ (VIII). In the light of the compositional history of Lord Jim, the transition from third- to first-person narration involves a further questioning of authority: that between the author and the text. The Gentleman Brown episode was not, in fact, part of Conrad's original conception of this run-away novel.10 Described by Conrad as a ‘most discreet, understanding man’,11 Marlow immediately redirects the narrative away from the ‘well-known fact’ of Jim's transgression as it concerns the Court of Inquiry: ‘Its object was not the fundamental why, but the superficial how, of this affair’ (VI). Instead, Marlow's interest centres on Jim himself: his concern is the felt, subjective experience behind the objective, outward facts, or what we might today term the situation's psychology and its meanings.

The reader, listening over the shoulders, as it were, of Marlow's after-dinner audience, receives the fruits of a lengthy personal inquiry involving a diverse roll-call of characters drawn from the maritime fraternity who, in their words or deeds, directly or indirectly pass comment on Jim. In the novel's first half, these include the Patna's European crew, Captain Brierly, the Malay helmsman, Bob Stanton of the Sephora, the French Lieutenant, Chester, Mr Denver and a host of minor characters, before Marlow calls upon Stein to ask his advice. Marlow's narration is both composed of and provides a forum for competing interpretations of Jim. The narrative's apparently random shape typifies the experimental and formal concerns of Modernism shared by Conrad's friends and contemporaries including Henry James and Ford Madox Ford.

Jim's exile from the sea after his trial is characterized by itinerancy: each spell of employment is cut short by a reminder of the infamous Patna affair, when ‘he would throw up the job suddenly and depart’ (I). His certificate cancelled, Jim has been expelled from the maritime community whose laws he has broken. Himself first and foremost a merchant seaman, Marlow fashions Jim's transgression in social terms: ‘The real significance of crime is in its being a breach of faith with the community of mankind’ (XIV). Appropriately, the Patna half of the narrative is dominated by the social consequences of Jim's jump and the practical necessity of continuing to live in society (though Jim remains markedly an outsider in Patusan). But Marlow is forced to admit that his young friend requires something beyond practical help: ‘I had given him many opportunities, but they had been merely opportunities to earn his bread’ (XIX). In the eyes of the marine fraternity, Jim's desertion of his ship brands him a coward; to him, the incident is a wasted opportunity to save 800 people single-handedly, to show his mettle and shine in the world's eyes: ‘My God! what a chance missed!’ (VII). Hardly surprisingly, Marlow recognizes that Jim, engaged in the workaday world – as a ship chandler's water-clerk or as manager of a rice-mill – is an aspiring hero with no stage for his desired actions: his ‘adventurous fancy was suffering all the pangs of starvation’ (XIII).

Central to the Patna section is Marlow's meeting with the French Lieutenant in a Sydney café, ‘by the merest chance’ (XII). Involved in the Patna's rescue, the French naval officer stayed aboard her for thirty hours. His rank, uniform and scars – the ‘effect of a gunshot’ (XII), Marlow concludes – identify him as ‘one of those steady, reliable men who are the raw material of great reputations’ (XIII), and as someone whose views on duty are pertinent to Marlow's inquiry. According to the French Lieutenant, whose very personality is subsumed by his social function, human frailty is innate: ‘Given a certain combination of circumstances, fear is sure to come’ (XIII). Yet he appreciates the consequences of being found out: ‘One truth the more ought not to make life impossible… But the honour—the honour, monsieur!… The honour… that is real—this is! And what life may be worth when… when the honour is gone—ah, ça! par exemple—I can offer no opinion. I can offer no opinion—because—monsieur—I know nothing of it’ (XIII). To Marlow, the Lieutenant has ‘pricked the bubble’ (XIII). While the gulf between what we actually do and what we should do seems self-evident, a logical crux remains. The honour on which life depends for its ‘worth’ is dependent on situations that expose innate human fear and, in extreme cases, cowardice. But if honour is contingent on circumstance, what price any absolute standard of conduct? Significantly, when Marlow asks a question typical of what are called ‘shame cultures’, where chivalric modes prevail – ‘Couldn't it reduce itself to not being found out?’ – the Frenchman replies, ‘This, monsieur, is too fine for me’ (XIII).

Sustained by conflicting visions of Jim, Marlow's narration is capable of registering the ambiguities about public and private codes of honour. For example, on Jim's response to the court's verdict he comments: ‘the idea obtrudes itself that he made so much of his disgrace while it is the guilt alone that matters’ (XVI). The issue of lost honour that provides the plot's mainspring is consequent upon Jim's feelings of disgrace at having betrayed a code of behaviour in which he continues to believe – quite a different thing from his guilt at having failed in his professional duty, for which he is duly punished by having his certificate cancelled. In essence, Jim has been judged twice: by the precepts of guilt culture, a matter of ‘face’ in society, and by a shame culture, whereby he judges himself and finds himself wanting. Honour and what the French Lieutenant calls ‘the eye of others’ (XIII) are shame culture concerns. Marlow's capacity to look beyond social formulations of Jim's (ironically, unnecessary) desertion of the Patna leads him to consult Stein, who re-envisions the problem as interior and private, sending Jim to a backwater symbolically cut off from the great world.

If the novel's Patna half is concerned with honour, a matter of public concern, the Patusan half reinstates the claims of conscience. The narrative split thus re-enacts the predicament of Jim himself, who is divided between social duty and personal responsibility. Marlow registers this division in his altered opinion. To begin with, he argues that Jim was ‘outwardly so typical of that good, stupid kind we like to feel marching right and left of us in life’ (V). This opinion is most obviously realized in the French Lieutenant's stern, unquestioning sense of duty. But when, after his last meeting with Jim, Marlow returns to this view – ‘we must fight in the ranks or our lives don't count’ (XXXVI) – he attributes it to the Privileged Man with whom he shares the conclusion of Jim's story. By contrast, Marlow's revised opinion is that ‘Jim had no dealings but with himself, and the question is whether at the last he had not confessed to a faith mightier than the laws of order and progress’ (XXXVI). The distance between these two opinions reflects the degree to which his understanding of Jim has modified and grown, testifying to Marlow's suitability as a sympathetic narrator, while endorsing the novel's epigraph.

Marlow's interview with Stein is pivotal to the narrative and to the enlargement of his perspective. Stein is partly modelled on Alfred Russel Wallace (1822–1913), a British naturalist whose travels in the Malay Archipelago led him, independently, to a theory of natural selection that hastened the publication of Darwin's On the Origin of Species (1859). Reputedly Conrad's ‘favourite bedside companion’,12 Wallace's The Malay Archipelago: The Land of the Orang-Utan and the Bird of Paradise (1869) variously influences the novel. Occurring about half-way through Lord Jim, the Stein chapter redirects the concern with honour, advancing the claims of personal autonomy above those of code and community. By contrast with the vision of honour promoted in the Patna narrative, where it is measured in terms of service and defined by a medley of European voices, Jim in Patusan is ‘in every sense alone of his kind’ (xxvii).

Naturalist and scientist, romantic adventurer and island trader, Stein, like Jim, is uprooted, having fled his native Bavaria after the failure of the 1848 Revolution. Unlike Jim, however, he has successfully combined heroic adventure with practical ‘management’ (XX), realizing his dreams and ambitions in the world. Recognizing a fellow romantic, Stein proposes a free rein to Jim's temperament by sending him to Patusan as his agent. In his deliberately gnomic formulation:

‘A man that is born falls into a dream like a man who falls into the sea. If he tries to climb out into the air as inexperienced people endeavour to do, he drowns—nicht wahr?… No! I tell you! The way is to the destructive element submit yourself, and with the exertions of your hands and feet in the water make the deep, deep sea keep you up.’ (XX)



In this passage, a frustratingly intractable Conradian crux, Stein identifies Jim's romantic temperament as his ‘destructive element’, but, in a supreme endorsement of individual identity over collective responsibility, he advocates ‘submission’ to it. An entomologist keenly aware of the delicate balance of natural forces that make possible the infinite variety of life-forms, Stein lifts the narrative from a moral on to a philosophical plane. Chester's claim that one ‘must see things exactly as they are’ (XIV) is countered in Stein's ‘experiment’, which, implicitly, demands a place in the world for those who ‘see things as they aren't’, that is, for the man blessed (or cursed) with imagination.





V


Until Gentleman Brown and his gang arrive in Patusan Jim's success in bringing order to social chaos is reminiscent of popular, mid-nineteenth-century ‘Beachcomber Memoirs’ of G. A. Henty, R. M. Ballantyne and others – exotic accounts of European castaways, endowed with more boyish pluck than introspection, reinventing themselves on foreign shores through manly acts of heroism. Jim's very name recalls the boy-hero of Robert Louis Stevenson's Treasure Island (1883), Jim Hawkins, and perhaps suggests that Conrad is consciously re-envisioning the boys’ adventure tale. The ‘light holiday literature’ (I) that inspired Jim to go to sea in quest of heroic adventure is realized in Patusan, where, by his own definition, his success is ‘immense’ (XXVII). Incarcerated in the Rajah's stockade on arriving, he escapes to lead Doramin's Bugis to victory over the tyrannical Sherif Ali, rescuing the country from ‘endless insecurity’ (XXV). Thereafter, he dominates Patusan's political and social landscape: ‘His word decided everything’ (XXVII). In addition, he attends to Stein's trading interests and, in an obvious gesture towards chivalric tropes, earns the love of Jewel. If, as critics have suggested, the reader's attention flags during this sequence, it may be because, as Jane Austen said of her heroines, ‘pictures of perfection… make me sick’.13

In its concern with public shame and private guilt, outsides and insides, the narrative seems to demand Patusan as an interior alternative to the world of the Patna. But, despite the echo of ‘Patna’ in ‘Patusan’, the latter's status renders their correspondence problematic. The state is located where ‘the haggard utilitarian lies of our civilisation wither and die, to be replaced by pure exercises of imagination’ (XXIX). These ‘utilitarian lies’ notwithstanding, in a novel concerned with the rituals that make private matters public, the moonlit setting and distance from ‘the world where events move, men change, light flickers, life flows’ (XXV) serve to erase history from Jim's self-imaging in Patusan, where he has ‘left his earthly failings behind him’ (XXI) and, in consequence, to complicate reparation for his actual crime. Jim acknowledges this irreconcilability when he tells Marlow: ‘“I have got back my confidence in myself—a good name—yet sometimes I wish… No! I shall hold what I've got. Can't expect anything more.” He flung his arm out towards the sea. “Not out there anyhow”’ (XXXV).

After the psychological intensity of the Patna chapters, Marlow's frame of reference in the Patusan is at once more symbolic and aesthetic. His relationship to Jim's story alters: he becomes an observer of Stein's experiment, inevitably so since ‘to Jim's successes there were no externals’ (XXII). In contrast to the mutable outside world, Patusan, true to the tropes of colonialist discourse, remains timeless and static. The characters grouped around Jim exist ‘as if under an enchanter's wand’, becoming like figures fixed in a painting: Dain Waris is ‘intelligent and brave’; Tamb' Itam ‘surly and faithful’; Jewel ‘absorbed in her frightened, suspicious adoration’ (XXV). With its split conical hill presenting an objective correlative of Jim's divided psyche and flowers that seem ‘grown not in this world’ (XXXIV), Patusan's landscape is also enlisted in this aestheticism. Both a densely realized place of tropical moonlight and surf-swept shores and an imaginative space, Patusan simultaneously sustains a colonialist fantasy and a romantic allegory. Combining these two imaginative realms irresistibly incorporates Patusan's natives and immigrant community into the European chivalric dream. The resulting multiplicity of cultural voices has implications for the novel's conclusion, where Jewel, especially, remains ‘unforgiving’ (XLII) in her judgement of Jim's final act, in her eyes a desertion and breaking of his word. Thus Lord Jim transmits and transmutes the chivalric ideal of honour through two conflicts: within ‘us’ (Jim is ‘one of us’, yet we certainly do not desert our posts in a crisis) and between ‘us’ and ‘them’.

While Jim's conquest and influence enact, perhaps dangerously, a one-man mission civilisatrice, the creation of an order from which its subjects would benefit, casting him and Jewel as ‘knight and maiden meeting to exchange vows amongst haunted ruins’ (XXXIII) ensures that their relationship extends beyond an instance of the eroticized exotic into the realm of chivalry, whereby geographical, political and sexual conditions are transfigured into the tropes of romance. It is hardly incidental that Patusan itself is repeatedly described as Jim's ‘opportunity’, sitting ‘veiled by his side like an Eastern bride waiting to be uncovered by the hand of the master’ (XXIV). Positioned between competing public and personal worlds, Jim is presented in oxymoronic terms, whereby Jim the leader is ‘a captive in every sense’ (XXVI), ‘imprisoned within the very freedom of his power’ (XXIX).

Taking leave of Patusan, Marlow still considers Jim, clad all in white, as standing ‘at the heart of a vast enigma’ (XXXV). He has not yet solved the riddle of Jim's character as the structure of the novel tacitly promised. The novel's evolution again plays a role in complicating its meanings, for Conrad, at least briefly, seems to have contemplated closing the novel at this moment of leave-taking.14 Instead, Marlow concludes his narrative, the final chapter in Jim's life, in a letter to the sole member of his audience who ‘showed an interest in him that survived the telling of his story’ (XXXVI). The Privileged Man's strident defence of racial fault-lines – ‘giving your life up to them… was like selling your soul to a brute’ (XXXVI) – casts doubt on his suitability as recipient of these last words, but allies him with and prefigures Gentleman Brown, who will assail Jim in comparable terms: ‘You have been white once, for all your tall talk of this being your own people and you being one with them’ (XLI). By contrast, Jim's status in Patusan as resident alien, virtually a Conradian archetype, affords the reader a way of thinking through the protocols of race, not least because the novel's title, while capturing something of Jim's ambivalence in its combination of honorific ‘Lord’ and diminutive ‘Jim’, is a translation of Tuan Jim, suggesting that his very identity is multi-racially, and multi-culturally, compounded.

According to Frederic Jameson, the Patna sequence offers ‘one of the most breathtaking exercises in non-stop textual production that our literature has to show’.15 Anecdotal and reflective, this sequence is picaresque in manner, as Marlow's chance encounters contribute to his ever-altering portrait. By contrast, Jim's adventures in Patusan are chronicled in broadly linear fashion, the usual mode of myth and tale. This transition, moving from a fluid, even at times seemingly random, to a more punctuated formulation, stylistically demarcates Modernist and adventure narratives. Occasioned by Marlow meeting Gentleman Brown ‘most unexpectedly’ (XXXVII) shortly before he died, the episode reprises the psychological intensity of the novel's first part, reasserting the claims of the outside world and rescuing the tale for history.

Described as ‘a blind accomplice of the Dark Powers’ (XXXVIII), Gentleman Brown disrupts Jim's idyll. A ‘latter-day buccaneer’ with an ‘arrogant temper’ and ‘a vehement scorn for mankind at large and for his victims in particular’ (XXXVIII), Brown quickly sizes up Patusan as a source of plunder, though also seeks refuge from the world and its laws. In a novel of doubles, Brown is a malign counterpart to Jim. English outcasts, the men yet stand ‘on the opposite poles of that conception of life which includes all mankind’ (XLI). Jim's actions in Patusan are motivated by reparation, Brown's by a sour sense of revenge against the world. Jim declares himself ‘responsible for every life in the land’ (XLIII), Brown that he will ‘send half of your unoffending town to heaven with us in smoke’ (XLI). As so often in Conrad's ‘exotic’ fiction, the colonial world is transformed into a site of Western conflict.

Brown instinctively loathes Jim at first sight, seeing him (ironically enough, as Jim, too, is a moral outcast) as a representative of the world that ‘he had in the very shaping of his life contemned and flouted’ (XLI). Given Brown's ‘satanic gift of finding out the best and the weakest spot in his victims’ (XLII), his parley with Jim inevitably yields ‘a vein of subtle reference to their common blood, an assumption of common experience; a sickening suggestion of common guilt’ (XLII). The very clichés Brown uses to explain his predicament recall the Patna incident: ‘There are my men in the same boat—and, by God, I am not the sort to jump out of trouble and leave them in a d–d lurch’ (XLI). But the identification is misleading. Brown will condemn Jim for the very charity he extends, ludicrously castigating him for not having ‘devil enough in him to make an end of me’ (XXXVII). The parody ‘gentleman’, reputedly ‘the son of a baronet’ (XXXVIII), condemns the sense of fair-play that defines Jim's gentlemanliness.

In his conversation with Jewel, Jim unconsciously recalls the French Lieutenant's view of humanity: ‘“Are they very bad?” she asked, leaning over his chair. “Men act badly sometimes without being much worse than others,” he said after some hesitation’ (XLIII). The positioning of this statement, just before the violent end to Jim's reign in Patusan, offers a timely reminder of the contest between chivalry and stoicism in the novel. With the massacre of Dain Waris and his men, Brown balances ‘his account with the evil fortune’ (XLIV), and Jim's day in Patusan is over. Determined to face the consequences of his action rather than flee, he submits to Doramin and certain death. This suicidal visit, ensuring death before dishonour, inverts the pattern of the first half of the novel: in the Patna episode, Jim's self-image was overwhelmed by his instinct to survive; here it is rescued, even if paradoxically, at the expense of life itself.

Jim's pursuit of honour lost leads by way of chivalric romance to the archetypal death of the hero. In seeking to defend ‘the honour of the craft’, Marlow's narrative has led to its fictional source in medieval chivalry. Lord Jim thus evaluates and, more importantly, re-evaluates the ideal of heroic service on which the honour of maritime service depends. The chorus of Romantic motifs surrounding Jim's death virtually drowns out the voice of Jewel, urging him to fight. Like the future of Patusan itself, where the Rajah's men are already becoming more assertive, her claims are swept to the margins of a narrative whose focus Jim dominates. Conrad's account of writing the conclusion – pulled off in a twenty-one-hour stretch – captures this mood: ‘A great hush. Cigarette ends growing into a mound similar to a cairn over a dead hero. Moon rose over the barn looked in at the window and climbed out of sight. Dawn broke, brightened. I put the lamp out and went on, with the morning breeze blowing the sheets of MS all over the room. Sun rose. I wrote the last word’ (Collected Letters, vol. II, p. 284). Implicit in the first half of Lord Jim is the question ‘What must Jim do to be saved?’ Following Stein's injunction, ‘to the destructive element submit’ (XX), the answer the second half provides is fashioned in chivalric and egotistical terms: by accepting death on his own terms, through an act of sacrifice, the hero transcends death, raising himself above the common mortal condition to achieve immortality in legend and story.

To Marlow, who elegizes his friend, Jim's death is none the less the supreme instance of his ‘exalted egoism’: ‘He goes away from a living woman to celebrate his pitiless wedding with a shadowy ideal of conduct. Is he satisfied—quite, now, I wonder? We ought to know. He is one of us’ (XLV). Despite Marlow's – and, indeed, the novel's – insistent appeal to community, the Romantic ‘I’ struggles to bond with the romanticized ‘we’, leading one to suspect that Marlow's doubts about ‘the sovereign power enthroned in a fixed standard of conduct’ (V) remain. Such inconsistencies are integral to the novel's effect: the generically split narrative returns social codes to ritual meaning and, together with Marlow's poetics, ensures a perspective that can register ambiguities that evade the categories of official ideologies. In a final twist, the subject seems to escape its narrator, whose moral relativism is alien to the absolutism of myth and romance.





VI


Although written for an English audience at the close of the nineteenth century, the novel has resonated internationally, perhaps nowhere more than in Conrad's original cultural context. It was during the composition of Lord Jim that Eliza Orzeszkowa, a novelist and feminist, took Conrad to task for deserting Poland for financial gain abroad (Najder, ed., Conrad Under Familial Eyes, pp. 178–93). What the financially strapped Conrad, whose work at the time sold a couple of thousand copies, made of her claim that he wrote ‘popular and lucrative novels in English’ (p. 187) can only be imagined. However groundless, the charges none the less added a biographical inflection to the theme of betrayal in Lord Jim, as certain critics stretched to locate echoes of Patria and Polska in Patna. More to the point, sales of the novel rose markedly during the First World War, when the themes of conscience, duty and heroism were vividly present in public and private life. And half a century after its publication, the themes of Lord Jim would become a rallying-point for Poland during her resistance to German occupation during the Second World War. As Józef Szczepański records, Conrad became ‘the standard-bearer of his young compatriots’ (Najder, ed., Conrad under Familial Eyes, p. 277).

Lord Jim's enduring fascination stems, in part, from its quintessentially human subject. Albert J. Guerard attributed the novel's universality to the fact that ‘nearly everyone has jumped off some Patna and most of us have been compelled to live on, desperately or quietly engaged in reconciling what we are with what we would like to be’ (Guerard, p. 127). Published at the twentieth century's dawn, Lord Jim is a Janus-faced novel whose hero is situated between social inheritance and individual aspiration. Eighty years after its publication, Ian Watt claimed: ‘Jim does something which no other hero of a great twentieth-century novel has done: he dies for his honour’ (Watt, p. 356). Conrad's themes – the nature of honour, the power of friendship, the responsibility of privilege, the fragility of courage, the need for forgiveness, the bond and boundary between self and community – offer an enduring commentary on human experience. Jim is, after all, ‘one of us’, fated, as we are, never to be seen clearly and perhaps only glimpsing the workings of our own natures.

Writing in 1903, Conrad asserted that ‘Both at sea and on land my point of view is English, from which the conclusion should not be drawn that I have become an Englishman. That is not the case. Homo duplex has in my case more than one meaning’ (Collected Letters, vol. III, p. 89). The story of Jim narrated by Marlow, Lord Jim is, famously, a duplex novel. This dualism suits a tale that depends on contrasts and on Marlow's doubts. Whilst confirming that Jim achieved greatness, ‘as genuine as any man ever achieved’ (XXIV), Marlow wonders ‘as if it were our imagination alone that could set loose upon us the might of an overwhelming destiny’ (XXXVI). Jim's quest to regain his lost honour is an odyssey of self-discovery. In the interplay of public and private selves, he wins glory at the expense of social cohesion. The interrogation of his Romantic identity uncovers chivalric ideals on which collective experience depends, while subjecting that identity's restrictions and necessities to question.

Allan H. Simmons



Appendix


Author's Note


When this novel first appeared in book form a notion got about that I had been bolted away with. Some reviewers maintained that the work starting as a short story had got beyond the writer's control. One or two discovered internal evidence1 of the fact, which seemed to amuse them. They pointed out the limitations of the narrative form. They argued that no man could have been expected to talk all that time,2 and other men to listen so long. It was not, they said, very credible.

After thinking it over for something like sixteen years, I am not so sure about that. Men have been known, both in the tropics and in the temperate zone, to sit up half the night “swapping yarns.” This, however, is but one yarn, yet with interruptions affording some measure of relief; and in regard to the listeners’ endurance, the postulate must be accepted that the story was interesting. It is the necessary preliminary assumption. If I hadn't believed that it was interesting I could never have begun to write it. As to the mere physical possibility we all know that some speeches in Parliament have taken nearer six than three hours in delivery; whereas all that part of the book which is Marlow's narrative can be read through aloud, I should say, in less than three hours. Besides—though I have kept strictly all such insignificant details out of the tale—we may presume that there must have been refreshments on that night, a glass of mineral water of some sort to help the narrator on.

But, seriously, the truth of the matter is, that my first thought was of a short story, concerned only with the pilgrim ship episode; nothing more. And that was a legitimate conception. After writing a few pages, however, I became for some reason discontented and I laid them aside for a time. I didn't take them out of the drawer till the late Mr. William Blackwood3 suggested I should give something again to his magazine.

It was only then that I perceived that the pilgrim ship episode4 was a good starting-point for a free and wandering tale; that it was an event, too, which could conceivably colour the whole “sentiment of existence” in a simple and sensitive character. But all these preliminary moods and stirrings of spirit were rather obscure at the time, and they do not appear clearer to me now after the lapse of so many years.

The few pages I had laid aside were not without their weight in the choice of subject. But the whole was re-written deliberately. When I sat down to it I knew it would be a long book, though I didn't foresee that it would spread itself over thirteen numbers5 of “Maga.”

I have been asked at times whether this was not the book of mine I liked best. I am a great foe to favouritism in public life, in private life, and even in the delicate relationship of an author to his works. As a matter of principle I will have no favourites; but I don't go so far as to feel grieved and annoyed by the preference some people give to my Lord Jim. I won't even say that I “fail to understand….”No! But once I had occasion to be puzzled and surprised.

A friend of mine returning from Italy had talked with a lady there who did not like the book. I regretted that, of course, but what surprised me was the ground of her dislike. “You know,” she said, “it is all so morbid.”

The pronouncement gave me food for an hour's anxious thought. Finally I arrived at the conclusion that, making due allowances for the subject itself being rather foreign to women's normal sensibilities, the lady could not have been an Italian. I wonder whether she was European at all? In any case, no Latin temperament would have perceived anything morbid in the acute consciousness of lost honour. Such a consciousness may be wrong, or it may be right, or it may be condemned as artificial; and, perhaps, my Jim6 is not a type of wide commonness. But I can safely assure my readers that he is not the product of coldly perverted thinking. He's not a figure of Northern Mists either. One sunny morning, in the commonplace surroundings of an Eastern roadstead,7 I saw his form pass by—appealing—significant—under a cloud—perfectly silent. Which is as it should be. It was for me, with all the sympathy of which I was capable, to seek fit words for his meaning. He was “one of us.”8
